For this assignment, we were asked to determine the most statistically relevant ideologies that distinguish Republican from Democratic US presidents by looking at the Wikipedia pages of each president. Our final approach, presented here, is to build an LSA query engine for these Wikipedia documents, construct ideology vectors representative of each party's (modern day) philosophy, compute the cosine similarity between the queries and each president's Wikipedia document and average the similarities over each party (see PresidentsLSA.py for more details). We also plot the singular values of the documents' tf idf matrix, and also plot the transformed documents along the second and third dimension (since the first dimension often corresponds to information such as the length of each document). 

After building the query engine multiple times with varying number of singular values, we found that 10 singular values yeilds the best separation between Republican and Democratic presidents with our ideology vector queries. Interestingly, in the plot along the second and third dimension, we see the presidents are clustered according to time: presidents who served in the same historical era are much closer together. This makes sense from a historical perspective, as presidents who serve closer together in time will face a greater number of the same issues than those who don't. In other words, time seems to explain a lot of the document to document variation. In addition, we also pulled two Wikipedia articles pertaining to conservativism and liberalism in the US and computed the average cosine similarity over each party for each article. Unfortunately, the conservativism in the US article had a higher average similarity to Democratic presidents than Republican ones. Thus, we formed reduced ideology queries, keeping only the ideology we thought was most relevant to each party (read: keeping only the ideology we _remembered_ from high school US history...). Using these queries, we find that the liberal query is closer, on average, to the Democratic presidents and the conservative query, on average, is closer to the Republican presidents.

It is important to note that in constructing the LSA query engine, we didn't include presidents who served before 1890. Prior to the turn of the century, the political platforms of each party were almost entirely flipped. For example, Democrats advocated states rights, lower taxes and were more traditional-minded, whereas the Republicans advocated a larger federal government, more public works and advocated civil rights. Thus, for the purposes of finding the ideologies that distinguish Republican from Democratic presidents, we only consider presidents in a time period for which each political party remains ideologically self-consistent. Also, for the articles pertaining to conservativism and liberalism in US history, we only included the sections which were historically relevant to the presidents we chose.

To run all the analysis at once, from pulling the Wikipedia pages to querying the LSA engine and visualizing/outputting the results, simply run:

$ source run_analysis.sh